[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard, and
this is "Mystery Teachings."
One of the greatest catalysts
for growth and transformation
in our lives comes
through our relationships.
How is it that relationships
have such an effect on us?
In this episode, we explore
the underlying dynamics
of what I call
"relationship alchemy."
There is both an
art and a science
to building synergistic
relationships
and is some of the
biggest challenges
we encounter in our lives.
That's because we humans
are social creatures,
and yet, we also have
all of our flaws,
attachments, and
egos to contend with.
We both love and
despise each other.
We uplift and we tear down.
Sometimes we can really
grate on each other's nerves,
while other times, we help each
other feel safe and cared for.
And it's shocking to see
how quickly these feelings
and dynamics can
shift from one end
of the spectrum to the
other, sometimes overnight.
How can we gain greater mastery
in this aspect of our lives?
Well, for starters, there's
nothing like the relationships
in our lives to really
show us where we still
need to work on ourselves.
The people in our lives
are mirrors for us
to see ourselves.
Now, unfortunately, most people
don't want to see themselves.
So rather than own
their own stuff,
they project it onto others.
If we could just
shift this one thing
and start seeing the
people in our lives
as reflections of
ourselves, it would
make a world of difference.
Stop pointing the
finger out there
and start looking in here.
When we do, our relationships
become powerful catalysts
for healing and
transformation in our lives.
And when it comes to the
process of transformation,
there's some
fundamental archetypal
and alchemical energies
that we want to be aware of.
Understanding the
alchemy of relationships
is about helping
us come together
with others in such a way that
we can co-create something
better than what we
can do on our own.
It's about finding synergy,
even amidst the tension
and differences of opinion.
Just because we don't get
along with someone on our team
or in our life, it doesn't
mean we should resist them
or that they're wrong.
Instead, figure out how to use
the tension and redirect it.
Learn how to harmonize the
energy so that they can be
channeled in a good way.
And in order to do that, we
have to shift our own position
and rise to a
higher perspective.
This is what relationship
alchemy is all about.
It's about harnessing
the tension of opposites
or differences and finding ways
to harmonize those differences,
rather than experiencing
conflict from them.
Before we go much
further, let's get
clear on what the term "alchemy"
is as it's being used here.
What is this alchemy
we're talking about?
Is it about turning lead into
gold, as is often portrayed?
Not exactly.
This ancient system
is very misunderstood
within the scientific community.
It's been dismissed and ignored.
But the true roots of
alchemy reveal a rich system
for understanding the forces
of creation and transformation.
Through alchemy, we
can learn to harness
these energies to accelerate
our progression as individuals
and as a society.
I see alchemy as the
epitome of integrating
science, metaphysics, and
consciousness together.
It's the art and science
of transformation
and transmutation.
Or in other words, of changing
something into something
else that's even better.
Some of the most innovative
scientists were alchemists.
People like Isaac Newton,
Roger Bacon, Francis Bacon,
Leonardo da Vinci, Robert
Boyle, Paracelsus, Nikola Tesla,
and Wolfgang Pauli.
They all studied and
were inspired by alchemy.
And most of our
modern day sciences
were developed out of the
ancient traditions of alchemy,
including physics, chemistry,
astronomy, biology,
allopathic medicine,
pharmacology, psychology,
and many holistic
health practices.
Where modern science has taken
a purely materialist approach,
alchemy is intimately
connected to the philosophies
of hermeticism, mythology,
and spirituality.
Not only does alchemy
hold the secrets
to understanding and harnessing
this process of transformation
at many different
levels, but I believe
it's also the key to bridging
the fields of science, spirit,
and consciousness, again,
in a very practical way.
How do we apply alchemy
to relationships?
We've all heard the expression,
"opposites attract."
And the alchemical
process is driven
by the interaction and sometimes
the tension that arises
between different things.
We know in chemistry,
for example,
if we have two containers
with the same chemical
and we mix them
together, what happens?
Well, there's no reaction.
We just end up with
more of the same.
But if you take two
chemicals that are different
and mix them together,
a chemical reaction
starts to happen.
And out of that reaction,
something entirely new
can result. With
relationship alchemy,
it's about bringing
together different people
to create something
beyond what any of us
can create on our own.
It's through the interaction
of these different essences
that something new
can be generated.
What are these
different energies
that we're working
with in relationships?
Well, whether we're
talking about relationships
or any type of
transformational process,
the process of
creation is driven
by the interplay of masculine
and feminine energies.
These two poles of energy are
at the heart of all creation
and manifestation.
The seven hermetic principles
describe this dynamic
as the "principle of gender."
It says, "Gender
is in everything.
Everything has its masculine
and feminine principles.
Gender manifests on all planes."
Together, these two energies
are the most powerful forces
of creation.
Relationship alchemy
is specifically
about bringing together
masculine and feminine energies
to create.
Now when we say "masculine"
and "feminine" here,
we don't mean a physical
gender necessarily,
like a man or a woman.
We're talking about energy.
What exactly is masculine
and feminine energy?
How does this work in our lives?
Well, within each
person and every thing
is a mix of these two energies
in different proportions.
We all have masculine
and feminine energies,
but we'll be dominant
in one or the other.
When it comes to creating
something as an individual
or in relationships,
this alchemy
of masculine and feminine
energies is important.
We want to have good chemistry
with the people in our lives,
right?
Well, that's true
whether they're
our friends, our colleagues,
teammates, family members,
or romantic partnerships.
What we must
realize is that they
are going to have a different
mixture of these energies
than we do.
What we're looking
for are relationships
with people whose energetic
makeup complements our own.
By complementary, we
don't mean the same.
But rather, they bring
in different elements
that interact with our mix of
energy in a synergistic way.
The resulting reaction
produces something new,
and it's beyond what we
could achieve on our own.
Sometimes they might
grate against us
because they're
different, but this
is where the alchemy
can come in to help
us harmonize the tension and use
it to generate something new.
To get a better idea of
the nature of these two
energies, masculine
and feminine,
let's take a look at the
alchemical creation story.
To get there, we have to go
way back to the very beginning,
to the prima materia.
In the beginning, before
anything was manifested,
the prima materia was
like a watery chaos.
Everything was
contained within it.
All the raw material that
was needed for creation.
Think of it as a vast
sea of potentiality.
But it was in a state
of disorder, a chaos.
All opposites were
contained within it,
and they were this boiling
and writhing sea of potential.
It reminds me of
the quantum sea--
a dynamic flux of quantum
possibilities, yet nothing
actually popping out of it.
So all opposites, all
materia, everything
that can come into creation
is there in the prima materia,
but nothing is
coming out of it yet.
What needs to happen?
Why isn't anything manifesting?
Well, in order for
anything to manifest,
we need a catalyst to
start the reaction.
In the Kabbalistic
teachings, it says
that the limitless
source, or Ein Sof, which
transcends the prima
materia, sends out
a single ray of light.
It was that moment of
"let there be light"
that separated the
darkness from the light.
In the hermetica, it
states that, "In the deep,
there was boundless darkness,
and water, and fine intelligent
spirit, all existing by
divine power in chaos.
Then a holy light
was sent forth,
and elements solidified
out of liquid essence."
This divine power was
Ein Sof, the source.
And that holy light that
emanated from the source
catalyzed things to
start materializing out
of the quantum sea.
Now in the traditional
alchemical model,
it says that the light first
split the prima materia
into two.
And that first
division separated
what we call the "volatile"
from the "fixed."
What does this mean?
What is volatile
and what is fixed?
Well, volatile is
what we would consider
more of a masculine energy.
It's reactive and explosive.
It catalyzes and initiates
things to happen.
It sublimates and is
highly interactive.
The volatile is more of an
extroverted type of energy--
outward moving and expansive.
It's a force of energy.
The spark of life.
The fix is more of
a feminine energy.
It's about bringing everything
into form or containment
or a vessel.
It's more receptive.
Some people like
to say "passive,"
but I wouldn't call it passive.
It's more inward moving.
The fixed energies
are formative,
receiving, contracting.
It's an inward
movement of energy,
as opposed to an outward force.
These two types of energy--
volatile and fixed-- are
similar to the pillars of force
and form on the tree of life.
In alchemy, they're also
called sol and luna,
as the sun and the moon, and
they are assigned a gender
as masculine and feminine.
As far as planet Earth is
concerned, the sun and the moon
are the archetypes that
represent these two
initial forces of creation--
the volatile and the fixed.
But what happens next?
Well, once we have
this separation
into volatile and fixed,
next, these two energy
split again, duplicating the
initial act of separation.
This generates varying
amounts of volatile
and fixed to produce
four distinct forces.
There is 100 percent
volatile, which the alchemists
labeled as "fire."
Then there's a dominance
of volatile with some
fixed, which they
assign as "air."
The third is a dominance of
fixed with some volatile, which
they then called "water."
And finally, there's 100%
fixed, assigned as "earth."
This fire, air,
water, and earth are
what alchemists describe as the
fourth philosophical elements.
They're not the same as
the four physical elements
that we might
typically think of.
They're more like
forces of creation.
In physics, these would
correspond to the strong force,
the weak force, the
electromagnetic,
and the gravitational forces.
And thus were the four
philosophical elements
or forces of creation
born out of the principles
of masculine and
feminine energies.
The alchemical model then
takes this one step further.
These four forces were then
recombined in a new way
to generate what are called the
three essentials in alchemy.
In Western alchemy,
these three essentials
are called "mercury,"
"sulfur," and "salt."
In Ayurveda, they're
called vata, pitta, kapha.
In Taoism, they are the
shen, the qi, and the jing.
In yoga, they're the
sushumna, pingala, and ida.
In Kabbalah, these
three essentials
show up in multiple ways
on the tree of life.
Again, we should consider
these three essentials
to be more philosophical or
archetypal essences rather than
physical materia
that we typically
might associate
with mercury, sulfur
and, salt. Now, these
three essentials
combine in their
different proportions
to create everything.
And so everything within
the universe, on all planes,
contains these three essentials
in different amounts.
How do we work with
this in our lives?
When alchemy, it's about
refining the three essentials
of body, soul, and
spirit to bring them
into their most elevated state.
To do so, we must first identify
what's corrupting the system
and then address it.
Often the issues are lurking
beneath the surface, hidden
under layers of other things.
But the beauty of alchemy is
that by taking the whole system
through the
transformational process,
we'll be able to root
out any impurities
and uplift the whole
to a higher level.
This is true even if
we don't know what
or where the impurities
are at first.
And this applies no
matter what we're
starting with as our materia.
It could be a plant or
ourselves, a relationship
with another person or a team.
Alchemy applies at all levels.
It's truly universal.
Take for example a relationship
between two individuals.
Say these two people
get into an argument
and they're really
grating on each other.
One person makes a comment
without realizing that they're
stepping on a landmine,
and this comment
triggers a worthiness
issue for the other person.
The person who is
triggered gets emotionally
reactive and overreacts,
while the person who
made the comment gets
defensive and this situation
starts to snowball.
Sound familiar?
So what's going on here?
Well, from an
alchemist perspective,
the trigger points
are our impurities
that we want to clear out.
These impurities relate to
our egos' unresolved issues
or programming from the past
that pollute our filters
and cause us to react
disproportionately.
They're often belief
systems or subconscious
emotional attachments or
wounds from the past that
haven't been fully resolved.
And they can show up as coping
strategies or ways of defending
ourselves when we're triggered.
Typically, these
unpleasant encounters
are due to misperceptions.
Our subconscious and
unresolved issues
pollute our personal filters
and set off a chain reaction.
This is what happens
when we're triggered.
And it's not just about what
was said, but often the way
it was said that hit
that sensitive spot.
Once we realize
this is happening,
what can we do to resolve it?
Well, if we want to
get to the bottom of it
and create more harmony
in our relationships,
we can start by
doing two things.
First, observe our
reactions, and second,
identify where we're operating
from unresolved issues.
One way to know if our
emotional response is
current and appropriate for
this situation versus coming
from our subconscious is
to use the 15 minute rule.
What's the 15 minute rule?
Well, it's a marker that helps
us identify if our emotion is
current or not.
When our emotions are
current and appropriate
to the situation, we'll
feel them, express them,
and then we're done with
them within 15 minutes.
But if something unresolved from
our past has been triggered,
we'll think about it and emote
about it over and over for much
longer than 15 minutes.
We might carry it around for
days or even months or years.
Can you think of a time
when you've carried
an emotion around like this?
Often we might dwell
on the situation,
rehashing the scenario
over and over,
imagining all the ways
we should have responded.
Perhaps we might even vent to
other people who will listen
and sympathize with us.
We get fixated on
the situation, often
making the other person wrong
and justifying our position.
But you know what--
this attachment really
ties up our energy.
When we keep this up for
more than 15 minutes,
it's a sign that something from
our past has been triggered.
It's important to
feel our emotions,
acknowledge and
express them, but we
want to resolve it and move
on, rather than continuing
to rehash and amplify them.
How do we do this?
How do we let go?
If we can be aware and identify
when we're in that spiral,
we can stop obsessing
about the current situation
and ask ourselves,
what's this really about?
When have I felt
this way before?
How far back does it go?
By reflecting on
this, we can root out
what's at the bottom of it.
In the end, it
usually comes down
to some time when we
felt unloved, violated,
abused, or unworthy.
There's something underneath
that we haven't healed yet,
and that's why we
react negatively
to some offhand comments
someone makes in our presence.
Now from the
alchemist perspective,
this is a precious gift.
Here's what we need to
shift our thinking towards.
By getting triggered around
this unresolved issue,
it's brought an
impurity to the surface.
Now that I'm aware of it, I
can do something about it.
This is where I need healing.
This situation
actually did us a favor
because we need to
look at ourselves
and heal wherever it
is that we disconnected
from our wholeness.
And that trigger helps
us to trace our way back
to its origin.
After we get this
clarity, we can then
come back to the current
situation with a more
appropriate response.
Such a response may go
something like this--
"I'm sorry I reacted that way.
It triggered something old
and now I realize what it is.
And I'm working on
healing this now,
and I'd like to clear
things up with you."
This level of honesty
and vulnerability
will actually lead to
greater trust and bonding
with that other person.
This works, so long as
we really own our stuff
and stop blaming and
projecting it onto others.
The healing work is
a purifying process,
and the more we do it, the
more we raise our vibration.
We elevate ourselves
and bring ourselves
into a more integral
and a whole state.
We've distilled
out the essentials
and we've let go of the
impurities or corruptabiliy.
Once we've done that, we
can come back together.
If the other person
does their part as well,
then the relationship can
reunite from a more purified,
healed, and whole state.
We're still bringing our
unique mixture of energies,
but now we can create from
greater harmony and synergy
instead of conflict.
The conflict arises because of
our impurities and woundedness.
The synergy in
harmony comes when
we're in integrity,
balanced within ourselves.
That's when we can bring these
different gifts and skills
to the plate in a good way.
We can offer different
ways of relating
to create a
beautiful interaction
and synergy that everyone
thrives from and feels uplifted
by.
This is when we
have good chemistry.
And the result of
the interaction
is enlivening and inspiring.
There's a passion or
juice that we can feel.
And that good feeling may
come with a rush of dopamine,
oxytocin, and other
endorphins, all of which
happens because of the alchemy.
This is the interaction
of differences,
only now they're coming together
in a more harmonized way.
And once we've done
the work to purify,
we're better able to express
our positive qualities.
This is where real magic
happens in relationships.
When we come together with
this synergy and passion,
we can co-create something
beyond what either one can
create on their own.
We use this alchemy
when creating
a romantic relationship,
a friendship,
working as a team on a project,
or even creating a baby.
Is there a formula that we can
use to apply this in our lives?
Yes.
The basic process
is what alchemists
refer to as "solve et coagula."
It's a Latin phrase
that translates
as "dissolve and coagulate."
What it refers to is a process
of separating, then purifying,
and then reuniting.
Paracelsus, the 15th century
Swiss physician and alchemist,
also coined the term "spagyria."
Paracelsus had a penchant
for combining ancient words
to create new ones.
The "spagyria" comes
from a combination
of the ancient Greek word
spao, meaning to "draw out"
and ageiro, meaning "to gather."
So Spagyria or spagyrics means
to "draw out" and "to gather."
Paracelsus used this
word to describe
alchemy and the alchemical
process that we go through.
The process of drawing out,
purifying and recombining
the three essentials
within any form
is at the heart of alchemy.
How do we apply this
to relationships?
Well, the first
step is to separate.
To take some time
to be on our own.
To draw out our inner
truth and bring ourselves
into greater clarity.
We need to get clear about
who we are, what we are,
and what our strengths
and weaknesses are.
What we enjoy, how we want
to spend our time, and so on.
We also need to
take time to heal
the distortions
or the blocks that
get in our way of our
authentic expression.
It's a process of refinement
to come into greater connection
to our true self.
At some point, we may reach
as far as we can on our own,
or we may come to a
place of being more
in our refined essence--
knowing ourselves, our
strengths, and our gifts
more clearly.
And now it's time to gather--
to come together with others
who are also doing their work to
embody more of their true self.
Only after doing
this initial work can
we catalyze that next phase
of evolution and growth.
This then brings us to
actually the midpoint
in the alchemical
process, where we
come to a new level of
operating in relation to others.
But after some time,
we might realize
that while we've made
a lot of progress,
there's still something
that's bothering us.
It may be more subtle,
something maybe
just feels a little
unresolved and it
nags at us in our quiet moments
and it's not going away.
Even though as a whole
things feel better,
it's important that we
pay attention and address
these more subtle feelings.
Here's where we
have to dig deeper.
We must look within,
and usually this
involves an assessment
of our core values.
Is our current situation or
relationship really lining up
with our core values?
We may find ourselves
in a phase where
we begin to have to step back
again to figure ourselves out.
And this time, we do
it at a deeper level
to really self-assess.
Is it time to figure
out our bottom line
and get clear about what's
really bothering us?
There's a deeply introspective,
soul-searching process
that needs to happen here.
Sometimes we're faced with
core-level attachments
that we might need to sacrifice.
If this relationship is
going to continue and be all
that it can be, we may have
to let go of some things.
Maybe it's a core value
we thought was important,
but realize it's not as
important as this relationship.
So we must be willing to change.
Or maybe it is important and
we've reached our bottom line,
and in which case,
we might decide
we can't go any further unless
the other person adjusts.
When we do adjust,
there's usually
some kind of
breakthrough that happens
and we reunite
and it's glorious.
Now this relationship can
reach its full potential.
It becomes a power relationship,
an unstoppable force,
and amazing things can
happen as a result.
If we can't make
the breakthrough,
things might fizzle out.
That relationship might
end, and we go back
to the drawing
board with ourselves
to make room for
new relationships.
The goal is to find
those relationships that
can become the gold and
go through the process
of purification as we
create this indestructible
relationship.
Those relationships
will be the ones
where we complement each
other physically, emotionally,
mentally, and spiritually.
To reach the highest potential
in our relationships,
we have to be living the
concept of "namaste."
The divinity within me
recognizes and beholds
the divinity within you.
We recognize the
beauty, the unity,
the godliness in each other.
We come to this
place where we want
to treat each other
with so much love,
respect, and care because we
see them as this amazing being.
We see them as a divine being.
Only when we can do this,
then can we reach the goal.
But, it will only happen when
we have the staying power
to make it through the
tough points in the journey.
The alchemical
process is not easy.
Life is not easy.
Neither is cultivating
amazing relationships
that can rest upon a strong
foundation of love and honor.
In alchemy, we call this
"devotion to the great work."
It's unfortunate that
in today's world,
it seems that so
many people lack
such devotion to really
see things through,
even when they get tough.
Why is that?
Various experts
and media tell us
it's because of our short
attention spans and internet
culture of seeking
instant gratification.
But these are just symptoms
of something happening
at a much deeper level.
In essence, we've
forgotten or disconnected
from who we truly are.
And because of that, we've
fallen into mediocrity.
We must first remember and
reclaim our own divinity.
We have to be able to recognize
our beauty, worthiness,
self-respect, and love.
We may need to forgive ourselves
in order to love ourselves
without exception.
And forgiveness is at
the heart of all healing.
All healing starts
with forgiveness.
We have to accept all
parts of ourselves
and see the divinity within.
Only then can we
give that to another.
Join me again as we dive deeper
into the alchemical process
and the seven stages
of transformation.
I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard.
Thank you for exploring the
mysteries of relationship
alchemy with me in this
episode of "Mystery Teachings."
[MUSIC PLAYING]